More Than Able
Elevation Worship
meaning
Elevation Worship's 'More Than Able' is a declarative worship song centered on the unwavering belief in God's limitless power and capacity to exceed human expectations. Drawing heavily from biblical assurance, particularly Ephesians 3:20's declaration that God can do "immeasurably more" than we ask or imagine, it fosters trust in His sovereignty and faithfulness to accomplish the impossible.
apple_data
1680569027
lyrics
[Verse 1: Chandler Moore]
When did I start to forget all of the great things You did?
When did I throw away faith for the impossible?
How did I start to believe You weren't sufficient for me?
Why do I talk myself out of seeing miracles?

[Chorus: Chandler Moore]
You are more than able
You are more than able, You are, You are
You are more than able, yeah, we're singin'
You are more than able, who am I to deny what the Lord can do?

[Interlude: Chandler Moore]
Hey, it's easy for You, oh

[Verse 2: Tiffany Hudson, Chandler Moore, Both]
And now I see all that I have, oh, I've got my confidence back
I'll put my trust in the Onе who still does miracles, You do miracles, c'mon, say

[Chorus: Chandler Moore, Tiffany Hudson, Both]
You arе more than able, hey, ayy, hey
You are more than able, yes, you are (You are, Lord, we know it)
You are more than able, we've seen it and seen it, we've seen it and seen it
You are more than able, who am I to deny what the Lord can do? Woah

[Bridge: Tiffany Hudson, Chandler Moore, Both]
Can you imagine with all of the faith in the room
What the Lord can do, what the Lord can do
And it's gonna happen, just let the Way Maker through
He's gonna move, He's gonna move
Can you imagine with all of the faith in the room
What the Lord can do, what the Lord can do, ayy
And it's gonna happen (Let the Way Maker through), just let the Way Maker through
He's gonna move, yes, He's gonna move
And can you imagine with all of the faith in the room
What the Lord can do, what the Lord can do, oh
And it's gonna happen (Just let the Way), just let the Way Maker through
He's gonna move (He's gonna move), He's gonna move (Come on)

[Refrain: Tiffany Hudson, Chandler Moore, Both]
Anything is possible (Sing it out)
Anything is possible, oh
Anything is possible (Come on)
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do? Say, "Anything"
Anything is possible (We've seen it)
Anything is possible (So we believe it)
Anything is possible (Hey)
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do? (One more time, come on, anything)
Anything is possible
Anything is possible (Anything)
Anything is possible (Who am I? Oh)
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do? (Say it one more time)
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do?
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do?

[Interlude: Chandler Moore]
He still can do it
Still can do it
As I run out of time, yeah, He still can do it

[Chorus: Chandler Moore, Tiffany Hudson, Both]
You are more than able
You are more than able
You are more than able, oh
You are more than able, who am I to deny what the Lord can do?

[Verse 3: Chandler Moore]
I've come a long way
I've seen how You work
There's so much goodness and grace, ha
Much more than I deserve
'Cause I know who I am
But I can't stay where I'm at, oh
We've come this far by faith, oh, yes, we have
And I just can't turn back

[Tag: Chandler Moore, Tiffany Hudson, Both]
'Cause He's not done with me yet
He's not done with me yet, hey
There's so much more to this story, hey
You're not done with me yet
You're not done with me yet, hey
You're not done with me yet, no, no
There's so much more to this story, come on
You're not done with me, so (Yet)
You're not done with me yet ([?]), hey
You're not done with me yet ([?]), oh
There's so much more to this story ([?]), You're not done
You're not done with me yet

[Post-Chorus: Chandler Moore]
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do?
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do?

[Chorus: Chandler Moore, Tiffany Hudson, Both]
God is more than able, hey
God is more than able
God is (More than able), don't stop believin' right now, don't quit believin' right now
God is more than able
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do? (He still can do it)
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do? (Just 'cause I haven't seen it in my lifetime, that doesn't mean He can't do it)
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do? Haha, just 'cause it's not on my resumé, or just 'cause I don't have it, doesn't mean He can't do it
Oh, who am I to deny what the Lord can do? Oh (Hey)

[Outro: Chandler Moore, Chandler Moore & Tiffany Hudson]
He can still do miracles with nothin'
All it takes is nothin', all it takes is nothin'
He can do a miracle
Who am I to deny what the Lord can do?
He can do it, He can do it, He can do it
He's able, oh