TRUTH WILL SET YOU FREE
Forrest Frank
meaning
"TRUTH WILL SET YOU FREE" by Forrest Frank is an upbeat contemporary Christian song centered around the theme of spiritual liberation and freedom found in God's word. The track draws its core meaning and title directly from the biblical passage in John 8:32, which declares, "Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free." Through its energetic style, the song encourages believers to anchor their identity in divine truth rather than the pressures of the world.
apple_data
6781104206
lyrics
You can't take my sunshine, no, sirree
Hop up in that living water, come on, dive in deep
Don't you know He paid a price for you? And it ain't cheap
I can tell you no lie, the truth will set you free

Yeah, got 'em losin', you know that it's good
Run it back 'til it gets understood
By the man that they put on some wood
By the man that they put in that book, just look at him cook

That's five loaves and two fishes (two fishes)
That's all hits and no misses (no misses)
That's three points like he swishes (swishes)
That's one game, ain't no switches

Like up, down, left, right, hittin' that cheat code
In the water fast, I been gettin' them ketones (hallelujah)
I been gettin' my preach on
Peace out, devil, you can go ahead, be gone

Pull up at a place where they gon' need Freon
I ain't goin' there 'cause I got my freedom
Boyfriend bad, baby, go ahead and leave him
Boyfriend good, baby, go ahead and cleave him

Praise the Lord, got 10K reasons
Not just Christmas, every season
Tell the enemy straight to his

You can't take my sunshine, no, sirree
Hop up in that living water, come on, dive in deep
Don't you know He paid a price for you? And it ain't cheap
I can tell you no lie, the truth will set you free

If the truth will set you free
Then who you gonna be?
'Cause who the Son sets free is truly free indeed
If the truth will set you free
Then who you gonna be?
'Cause who the Son sets free is truly free indeed
Truly free indeed

You can't take my sunshine (no), no, sirree (no, sirree)
Hop up in that living water, come on, dive in deep
Don't you know He paid a price for you? (No)
And it ain't cheap (it ain't cheap)
I can tell you no lie (no), the truth will set you free

Do you wanna mix it right now?
Yeah, I'm ready, let's do it
This is crazy
It's dropping next Friday?
It's dropping this Friday
